[1] Matilda died in 1115. The name Tessa, the contraction of Contessa,
was still, long after her time, sometimes given to Florentine girls. See
Perrens, _Histoire de Florence_, vol. i. p. 126.

[2] Whether by Matilda the great Countess is meant has been eagerly
disputed, and many of the best critics--such as Witte and
Scartazzini--prefer to find in her one of the ladies of the _Vita
Nuova_. In spite of their pains it seems as if more can be said for the
great Matilda than for any other. The one strong argument against her
is, that while she died old, in the poem she appears as young.

[3] See note on _Inferno_ xxx. 73.

[4] It might, perhaps, be more correct to say that to some offices the
nobles were eligible, but did not elect.

[5] _Inf._ xiii. 75.

[6] _Inf._ x. 119.

[7] _Inf._ xxiii. 66.

[8] _Inf._ x. 51.

[9] _Purg._ vi. 144.

[10] Dante sets the Abbot among the traitors in Inferno, and says
scornfully of him that his throat was cut at Florence (_Inf._ xxxii.
119).

[11] Villani throws doubt on the guilt of the Abbot. There were some
cases of churchmen being Ghibelines, as for instance that of the
Cardinal Ubaldini (_Inf._ x. 120). Twenty years before the Abbot's death
the General of the Franciscans had been jeered at in the streets of
Florence for turning his coat and joining the Emperor. On the other
hand, many civilians were to be found among the Guelfs.

[12] Manfred, says John Villani (_Cronica_, vi. 74 and 75), at first
sent only a hundred men. Having by Farinata's advice been filled with
wine before a skirmish in which they were induced to engage, they were
easily cut in pieces by the Florentines; and the royal standard was
dragged in the dust. The truth of the story matters less than that it
was believed in Florence.

[13] Provenzano is found by Dante in Purgatory, which he has been
admitted to, in spite of his sins, because of his self-sacrificing
devotion to a friend (_Purg._ xi. 121).

[14] For this good advice he gets a word of praise in Inferno (_Inf._
xvi. 42).

[15] These mercenaries, though called Germans, were of various races.
There were even Greeks and Saracens among them. The mixture corresponded
with the motley civilisation of Manfred's court.

[16] _Inf._ xxxii. 79.

[17] _Inf._ x. 93.

[18] Lucera was a fortress which had been peopled with Saracens by
Frederick.

[19] Manfred, _Purg._ iii. 112; Charles, _Purg._ vii. 113.

[20] _Purg._ xx. 67.

[21] _Purg._ iii. 122.

[22] For an account of the constitution and activity of the _Parte
Guelfa_ at a later period, see Perrens, _Hist. de Florence_, vol. iv. p.
482.

[23] _Purg._ xx. 68.

[24] _Parad._ xi. 89.

[25] _Parad._ xvi. 40, etc.

[26] _Inf._ xxix. 31.

[27] _Inf._ x. 42. Though Dante was descended from nobles, his rank in
Florence was not that of a noble or magnate, but of a commoner.

[28] The month is indicated by Dante himself, _Parad._ xxii. 110. The
year has recently been disputed. For 1265 we have J. Villani and the
earliest biographers; and Dante's own expression at the beginning of the
_Comedy_ is in favour of it.

[29] _Inf._ xxiii. 95.

[30] _Inf._ xix. 17; _Parad._ xxv. 9.

[31] _Purg._ xxx. 55.

[32] _Inf._ viii. 45, where Virgil says of Dante that blessed was she
that bore him, can scarcely be regarded as an exception to this
statement.

[33] In 1326, out of a population of ninety thousand, from eight to ten
thousand children were being taught to read; and from five to six
hundred were being taught grammar and logic in four high schools. There
was not in Dante's time, or till much later, a University in Florence.
See J. Villani, xi. 94, and Burckhardt, _Cultur der Renaissance_, vol.
i. p. 76.

[34] For an interesting account of Heresy in Florence from the eleventh
to the thirteenth centuries, see Perrens, _Hist. de Florence_, vol. i.
livre ii. chap. iii.

[35] It opens with Brunetto's being lost in the forest of Roncesvalles,
and there are some other features of resemblance--all on the
surface--between his experience and Dante's.

[36] G. Villani, viii. 10. Latini died in 1294. Villani gives the old
scholar a very bad moral character.

[37] _Inf._ xv. 84.

[38] We may, I think, assume the _Vita Nuova_ to have been published
some time between 1291 and 1300; but the dates of Dante's works are far
from being ascertained.

[39] So long as even Italian critics are not agreed as to whether the
title means _New Life_, or _Youth_, I suppose one is free to take his
choice; and it seems most natural to regard it as referring to the new
world into which the lover is transported by his passion.

[40] As, indeed, Boccaccio, _Vita di Dante_, expressly says was the
case.

[41] In this adopting a device frequently used by the love-poets of the
period.--Witte, _Dante-Forschungen_, vol. ii. p. 312.

[42] The _Vita Nuova_ contains some thirty poems.

[43] See Sir Theodore Martin's Introduction to his Translation of _Vita
Nuova_, page xxi.

[44] In this matter we must not judge the conduct of Dante by English
customs.

[45] _Donne, ch' avete intelletto d' amore_: Ladies that are acquainted
well with love. Quoted in _Purg._ xxiv. 51.

[46] Beatrice died in June 1290, having been born in April 1266.

[47] _Purg._ xi. 98.

[48] _Purg._ xxiv. 52.

[49] The date of the _Convito_ is still the subject of controversy, as
is that of most of Dante's works. But it certainly was composed between
the _Vita Nuova_ and the _Comedy_.

There is a remarkable sonnet by Guido Cavalcanti addressed to Dante,
reproaching him for the deterioration in his thoughts and habits, and
urging him to rid himself of the woman who has bred the trouble. This
may refer to the time after the death of Beatrice. See also _Purg._ xxx.
124.

[50] _Convito_ ii. 13.

[51] Some recent writers set his marriage five years later, and reduce
the number of his children to three.

[52] His sister is probably meant by the 'young and gentle lady, most
nearly related to him by blood' mentioned in the _Vita Nuova_.

[53] The difference between the Teutonic and Southern conception of
marriage must be kept in mind.

[54] He describes the weather on the day of the battle with the
exactness of one who had been there (_Purg._ v. 155).

[55] Leonardo Bruni.

[56] _Inf._ xxii. 4.

[57] _Inf._ xxi. 95.

[58] _Conv._ iii. 9, where he illustrates what he has to say about the
nature of vision, by telling that for some time the stars, when he
looked at them, seemed lost in a pearly haze.

[59] The _Convito_ was to have consisted of fifteen books. Only four
were written.

[60] _Wife of Bath's Tale._ In the context he quotes _Purg._ vii. 121,
and takes ideas from the _Convito_.

[61] Dies to sensual pleasure and is abstracted from all worldly affairs
and interests. See _Convito_ iv. 28.

[62] From the last canzone of the _Convito_.

[63] In the _Vita Nuova_.

[64] _Purg._ xxiii. 115, xxiv. 75; _Parad._ iii. 49.

[65] _Purg._ xi. 95.

[66] _Purg._ ii. 91.

[67] _Purg._ iv. 123.

[68] Sacchetti's stories of how Dante showed displeasure with the
blacksmith and the donkey-driver who murdered his _canzoni_ are
interesting only as showing what kind of legends about him were current
in the streets of Florence.--Sacchetti, _Novelle_, cxiv, cxv.

[69] _Purg._ xii. 101.

[70] _Purg._ xi. 94:--

        'In painting Cimabue deemed the field
        His own, but now on Giotto goes the cry,
        Till by his fame the other's is concealed.'

[71] Giotto is often said to have drawn inspiration from the _Comedy_;
but that Dante, on his side, was indebted to the new school of painting
and sculpture appears from many a passage of the _Purgatorio_.

[72] Serfage had been abolished in 1289. But doubt has been thrown on
the authenticity of the deed of abolition. See Perrens, _Hist. de
Florence_, vol. ii. p. 349.

[73] No unusual provision in the industrious Italian cities. Harsh
though it may seem, it was probably regarded as a valuable concession to
the nobles, for their disaffection appears to have been greatly caused
by their uneasiness under disabilities. There is much obscurity on
several points. How, for example, came the nobles to be allowed to
retain the command of the vast resources of the _Parte Guelfa_? This
made them almost independent of the Commonwealth.

[74] At a later period the Priors were known as the Signory.

[75] Fraticelli, _Storia della Vita di Dante_, page 112 and note.

[76] It is to be regretted that Ampère in his charming _Voyage
Dantesque_ devoted no chapter to San Gemigniano, than which no Tuscan
city has more thoroughly preserved its mediæval character. There is no
authority for the assertion that Dante was employed on several
Florentine embassies. The tendency of his early biographers is to
exaggerate his political importance and activity.

[77] Under the date of April 1301 Dante is deputed by the Road Committee
to see to the widening, levelling, and general improvement of a street
in the suburbs.--Witte, _Dante-Forschungen_, vol. ii. p. 279.

[78] Dante has a word of praise for Giano, at _Parad._ xvi. 127.

[79] At which Dante fought. See page lxii.

[80] Vieri was called Messer, a title reserved for magnates, knights,
and lawyers of a certain rank--notaries and jurisconsults; Dante, for
example, never gets it.

[81] Villani acted for some time as an agent abroad of the great
business house of Peruzzi.

[82] _Inf._ iii. 60.

[83] He is 'the Prince of the modern Pharisees' (_Inf._ xxvii. 85); his
place is ready for him in hell (_Inf._ xix. 53); and he is elsewhere
frequently referred to. In one great passage Dante seems to relent
towards him (_Purg._ xx. 86).

[84] Albert of Hapsburg was chosen Emperor in 1298, but was never
crowned at Rome.

[85] As in the days of Guelf and Ghibeline, so now in those of Blacks
and Whites, the common multitude of townsmen belonged to neither party.

[86] An interdict means that priests are to refuse sacred offices to all
in the community, who are thus virtually subjected to the minor
excommunication.

[87] Guido died soon after his return in 1301. He had suffered in health
during his exile. See _Inf._ x. 63.

[88] Charles of Anjou had lost Sicily at the Sicilian Vespers, 1282.

[89] _Purg._ xx. 76.

[90] Witte attributes the composition of the _De Monarchia_ to a period
before 1301 (_Dante-Forschungen_, vol. i. Fourth Art.), but the general
opinion of critics sets it much later.

[91] _Inf._ vi. 66, where their expulsion is prophesied.

[92] Dante's authorship of the letter is now much questioned. The drift
of recent inquiries has been rather to lessen than to swell the bulk of
materials for his biography.

[93] _Parad._ xvii. 61.

[94] _Purg._ xxiv. 82.

[95] See at _Purg._ xx. 43 Dante's invective against Philip and the
Capets in general.

[96] Henry had come to Italy with the Pope's approval. He was crowned by
the Cardinals who were in Rome as Legates.

[97] _Parad._ xxx. 136. High in Heaven Dante sees an ample chair with a
crown on it, and is told it is reserved for Henry. He is to sit among
those who are clothed in white. The date assigned to the action of the
_Comedy_, it will be remembered, is the year 1300.

[98] _Inf._ xix. 82, where the Gascon Clement is described as a 'Lawless
Pastor from the West.'

[99] The ingenious speculations of Troya (_Del Veltro Allegorico di
Dante_) will always mark a stage in the history of the study of Dante,
but as is often the case with books on the subject, his shows a
considerable gap between the evidence adduced and the conclusions drawn
from it. He would make Dante to have been for many years a satellite of
the great Ghibeline chief. Dante's temper or pride, however we call it,
seems to have been such as to preserve him from ever remaining attached
for long to any patron.

[100] _Inf._ x. 81.

[101] The _Convito_ is in Italian, and his words are: 'wherever this
language is spoken.'

[102] His letter to the Florentines and that to the Emperor are dated in
1311, from 'Near the sources of the Arno'--that is, from the Casentino,
where the Guidi of Romena dwelt. If the letter of condolence with the
Counts Oberto and Guido of Romena on the death of their uncle is
genuine, it has great value for the passage in which he excuses himself
for not having come to the funeral:--'It was not negligence or
ingratitude, but the poverty into which I am fallen by reason of my
exile. This, like a cruel persecutor, holds me as in a prison-house
where I have neither horse nor arms; and though I do all I can to free
myself, I have failed as yet.' The letter has no date. Like the other
ten or twelve epistles attributed to Dante, it is in Latin.

[103] There is a splendid passage in praise of this family, _Purg._
viii. 121. A treaty is on record in which Dante acts as representative
of the Malaspini in settling the terms of a peace between them and the
Bishop of Luni in October 1306.

[104] The authority for this is Benvenuto of Imola in his comment on the
_Comedy_ (_Purg._ xi.). The portrait of Dante by Giotto, still in
Florence, but ruined by modern bungling restoration, is usually believed
to have been executed in 1301 or 1302. But with regard to this, see the
note at the end of this essay.

[105] It is true that Villani not only says that 'he went to study at
Bologna,' but also that 'he went to Paris and many parts of the world'
(_Cronica_, ix. 136), and that Villani, of all contemporary or nearly
contemporary writers, is by far the most worthy of credence. But he
proves to be more than once in error regarding Dante; making him,
_e.g._, die in a wrong month and be buried in a wrong church at Ravenna.
And the 'many parts of the world' shows that here he is dealing in
hearsay of the vaguest sort. Nor can much weight be given to Boccaccio
when he sends Dante to Bologna and Paris. But Benvenuto of Imola, who
lectured on the _Comedy_ at Bologna within fifty years of Dante's death,
says that Dante studied there. It would indeed be strange if he did not,
and at more than one period, Bologna being the University nearest
Florence. Proof of Dante's residence in Paris has been found in his
familiar reference to the Rue du Fouarre (_Parad._ x. 137). His graphic
description of the coast between Lerici and Turbia (_Purg._ iii. 49, iv.
25) certainly seems to show a familiarity with the Western as well as
the Eastern Rivieras of Genoa. But it scarcely follows that he was on
his way to Paris when he visited them.

[106] _Inf._ xiii. 58.

[107] 'O ye, who have hitherto been following me in some small
craft, ... put not further to sea, lest, losing sight of me, you lose
yourselves' (_Parad._ ii. 1). But, to tell the truth, Dante is never so
weak as a poet as when he is most the philosopher or the theologian.
The following list of books more or less known to him is not given as
complete:--The Vulgate, beginning with St. Jerome's Prologue; Aristotle,
through the Latin translation then in vogue; Averroes, etc.; Thomas
Aquinas and the other Schoolmen; much of the Civil and Canon law;
Boethius; Homer only in scraps, through Aristotle, etc.; Virgil, Cicero
in part, Livy, Horace, Ovid, Terence, Lucan, and Statius; the works of
Brunetto Latini; the poetical literature of Provence, France, and Italy,
including the Arthurian Romances--the favourite reading of the Italian
nobles, and the tales of Charlemagne and his Peers--equally in favour
with the common people. There is little reason to suppose that among the
treatises of a scientific and quasi-scientific kind that he fell in
with, and of which he was an eager student, were included the works of
Roger Bacon. These there was a conspiracy among priests and schoolmen to
keep buried. Dante seems to have set little store on ecclesiastical
legends of wonder; at least he gives them a wide berth in his works.

[108] In the notes to Fraticelli's _Vita di Dante_ (Florence 1861) are
given copies of documents relating to the property of the Alighieri, and
of Dante in particular. In 1343 his son Jacopo, by payment of a small
fine, recovered vineyards and farms that had been his father's.--Notes
to Chap. iii. Fraticelli's admirable Life is now in many respects out of
date. He accepts, _e.g._, Dino Compagni as an authority, and believes in
the romantic story of the letter of Fra Ilario.

[109] The details are given by Witte, _Dante-Forschungen_, vol ii. p.
61. The amount borrowed by Dante and his brother (and a friend) comes to
nearly a thousand gold florins. Witte takes this as equivalent to 37,000
francs, _i.e._ nearly £1500. But the florin being the eighth of an
ounce, or about ten shillings' worth of gold, a thousand florins would
be equal only to £500--representing, of course, an immensely greater sum
now-a-days.

[110] _Purg._ viii. 76.

[111] See in Scartazzini, _Dante Alighieri_, 1879, page 552, extract
from the will of her mother Maria Donati, dated February 1314. Many of
these Florentine dates are subject to correction, the year being usually
counted from Lady-Day. 'In 1880 a document was discovered which proves
Gemma to have been engaged in a law-suit in 1332.--_Il Propugnatore_,
xiii^a. 156,'--Scheffer-Boichorst, _Aus Dantes Verbannung_, page 213.

[112] _Purg._ xxiv. 37.

[113] _Inf._ xxi. 40.

[114] _In questo mirifico poeta trovò ampissimo luego la lussuria; e non
solamente ne' giovanili anni, ma ancora ne' maturi._--Boccaccio, _La
Vita di Dante_. After mentioning that Dante was married, he indulges in
a long invective against marriage; confessing, however, that he is
ignorant of whether Dante experienced the miseries he describes. His
conclusion on the subject is that philosophers should leave marriage to
rich fools, to nobles, and to handicraftsmen.

[115] In Purgatory his conscience accuses him of pride, and he already
seems to feel the weight of the grievous burden beneath which the proud
bend as they purge themselves of their sin (_Purg._ xiii. 136). Some
amount of self-accusation seems to be implied in such passages as
_Inf._, v. 142 and _Purg._ xxvii. 15, etc.; but too much must not be
made of it.

[116] In a letter of a few lines to one of the Marquises Malaspina,
written probably in the earlier years of his exile, he tells how his
purpose of renouncing ladies' society and the writing of love-songs had
been upset by the view of a lady of marvellous beauty who 'in all
respects answered to his tastes, habits, and circumstances.' He says he
sends with the letter a poem containing a fuller account of his
subjection to this new passion. The poem is not found attached to the
copy of the letter, but with good reason it is guessed to be the Canzone
beginning _Amor, dacchè convien_, which describes how he was
overmastered by a passion born 'in the heart of the mountains in the
valley of that river beside which he had always been the victim of
love.' This points to the Casentino as the scene. He also calls the
Canzone his 'mountain song.' The passion it expresses may be real, but
that he makes the most of it appears from the close, which is occupied
by the thought of how the verses will be taken in Florence.

[117] However early the _De Monarchia_ may have been written, it is
difficult to think that it can be of a later date than the death of
Henry.

[118] The _De Vulgari Eloquio_ is in Latin. Dante's own Italian is
richer and more elastic than that of contemporary writers. Its base is
the Tuscan dialect, as refined by the example of the Sicilian poets. His
Latin, on the contrary, is I believe regarded as being somewhat
barbarous, even for the period.

[119] In his _Quæstio de Aqua et Terra_. In it he speaks of having been
in Mantua. The thesis was maintained in Verona, but of course he may,
after a prolonged absence, have returned to that city.

[120] _Parad._ xvii. 70.

[121] _Purg._ xviii. 121.

[122] But in urgent need of more of it.--He says of 'the sublime
Cantica, adorned with the title of the _Paradiso_', that '_illam sub
præsenti epistola, tamquam sub epigrammate proprio dedicatam, vobis
adscribo, vobis offero, vobis denique recommendo_.' But it may be
questioned if this involves that the Cantica was already finished.

[123] As, for instance, Herr Scheffer-Boichorst in his _Aus Dantes
Verbannung_, 1882.

[124] The Traversari (_Purg._ xiv. 107). Guido's wife was of the
Bagnacavalli (_Purg._ xiv. 115). The only mention of the Polenta family,
apart from that of Francesca, is at _Inf._ xxvii. 41.

[125] In 1350 a sum of ten gold florins was sent from Florence by the
hands of Boccaccio to Beatrice, daughter of Dante; she being then a nun
at Ravenna.

[126] The embassy to Venice is mentioned by Villani, and there was a
treaty concluded in 1321 between the Republic and Guido. But Dante's
name does not appear in it among those of the envoys from Ravenna. A
letter, probably apocryphal, to Guido from Dante in Venice is dated
1314. If Dante, as is maintained by some writers, was engaged in tuition
while in Ravenna, it is to be feared that his pupils would find in him
an impatient master.

[127] Not that Dante ever mentions these any more than a hundred other
churches in which he must have spent thoughtful hours.

[128] _Purg._ xxviii. 20.

[129] A certain Cecco d'Ascoli stuck to him like a bur, charging him,
among other things, with lust, and a want of religious faith which would
one day secure him a place in his own Inferno. Cecco was himself burned
in Florence, in 1327, for making too much of evil spirits, and holding
that human actions are necessarily affected by the position of the
stars. He had been at one time a professor of astronomy.

[130] Gabriel Rossetti, _Comment on the Divina Commedia_, 1826, and
Aroux, _Dante, Hérétique, Révolutionnaire et Socialiste_, 1854.

[131] Scartazzini, _Dante Alighieri, Seine Zeit_, etc., 1879, page 268.

[132] _Parad._ xxiv. 86.

[133] _Parad._ xxiv. 145.

[134] _Inf._ xxvii. 101; _Purg._ iii. 118.

[135] _Parad._ xxiv. 91.

[136] _Parad._ xxiv. 106.

[137] _Inf._ x. and xxviii. There is no place in Purgatory where those
who in their lives had once held heretical opinions are purified of the
sin; leaving us to infer that it could be repented of in the world so as
to obliterate the stain. See also _Parad._ iv. 67.

[138] _Purg._ i. 71.

[139] _Purg._ xxvii. 139.

[140] _Purg._ xix. 134.

[141] _Parad._ xxv. 1.

[142] It is best known, and can now be judged of only through the
lithograph after a tracing made by Mr. Seymour Kirkup before it was
restored and ruined: published by the Arundel Society.

[143] Antonio Pucci, born in 1300, in his _Centiloquio_, describes the
figure of Dante as being clothed in blood-red. Philip Villani also
mentions it. He wrote towards the close of the fourteenth century;
Vasari towards the middle of the sixteenth.

[144] In the Munich collection of drawings, and ascribed to Masaccio,
but with how much reason I do not know.

[145] Painted by Domenico Michelino in 1465, after a sketch by Alessio
Baldovinetto.

[146] 'Wearing over the long hair of the Frenchmen of the period a
coroneted cap.'--Crowe and Cavalcaselle, _History of Painting in Italy_
(1864), i. 264.

[147] Vol. i. p. 269.

[148] The Priorate was the highest office to which a citizen could
aspire, but by no means the highest in Florence.

[149] I suppose the meaning is 'immediately previous.'

[150] John Villani, _Cronica_, viii. 40 and 49; and Perrens, _Hist. de
Florence_, under date of 1301. Charles entered Florence on the 1st of
November of that year, and left it in the following April.

[151] Who the other Florentines in the fresco are does not greatly
affect the present question. Villani says that along with Dante Giotto
painted Corso Donati and Brunetto Latini.

[152] Only twenty-five, if the commonly accepted date of his birth is
correct. In any case, he was still a young man.

[153] It is true that, on technical grounds, it has been questioned if
it is Giotto's at all; but there is more than sufficient reason to think
it is. With such doubts however we are scarcely here concerned. Even
were it proved to be by a pupil, everything in the text that applies to
the question of date would still remain in point.

[154] J. Villani, ix. 353.

[155] J. Villani, x. 1.

[156] _Ibid._ x. 49.

[157] J. Villani, x. 107.

[158] Long since destroyed.

[159] An anachronism of another kind would have been committed by
Giotto, if, before the _Comedy_ was even begun, he had represented Dante
as holding the closed book and cluster of three pomegranates--emblematical
of the three regions described by him and of the completion of his
work.--I say nothing of the Inferno found on another wall of the chapel,
since there seems good reason to doubt if it is by Giotto.