[759] _Semele_: The daughter of Cadmus, founder and king of Thebes, was
beloved by Jupiter and therefore hated by Juno, who induced her to court
destruction by urging the god to visit her, as he was used to come to
Juno, in all his glory. And in other instances the goddess took revenge
(Ovid, _Metam._ iv.).

[760] _Athamas_: Married to a sister of Semele, was made insane by the
angry Juno, with the result described in the text.

[761] _Hecuba_: Wife of Priam, king of Troy, and mother of Polyxena and
Polydorus. While she was lamenting the death of her daughter, slain as
an offering on the tomb of Achilles, she found the corpse of her son,
slain by the king of Thrace, to whose keeping she had committed him
(Ovid, _Metam._ xiii.).

[762] _Trojan fury, etc._: It was by the agency of a Fury that Athamas
was put out of his mind; but the Trojan and Theban furies here meant are
the frenzies of Athamas and Hecuba, wild with which one of them slew his
son, and the other scratched out the eyes of the Thracian king.

[763] _Capocchio_: See close of the preceding Canto. Here as elsewhere
sinners are made ministers of vengeance on one another.

[764] _The Aretine_: Griffolino, who boasted he could fly; already
represented as trembling (_Inf._ xxix. 97).

[765] _Gianni Schicchi_: Giovanni Schicchi, one of the Cavalcanti of
Florence.

[766] _Myrrha_: This is a striking example of Dante's detestation of
what may be called heartless sins. It is covered by the classification
of Canto xi. Yet it is almost with a shock that we find Myrrha here for
personation, and not rather condemned to some other circle for another
sin.

[767] _Buoso Donati_: Introduced as a thief in the Seventh Bolgia
(_Inf._ xxv. 140). Buoso was possessed of a peerless mare, known as the
Lady of the herd. To make some amends for his unscrupulous acquisition
of wealth, he made a will bequeathing legacies to various religious
communities. When he died his nephew Simon kept the fact concealed long
enough to procure a personation of him as if on his death-bed by Gianni
Schicchi, who had great powers of mimicry. Acting in the character of
Buoso, the rogue professed his wish to make a new disposition of his
means, and after specifying some trifling charitable bequests the better
to maintain his assumed character, named Simon as general legatee, and
bequeathed Buoso's mare to himself.

[768] _O ye, etc._: The speaker has heard and noted Virgil's words of
explanation given in the previous Canto, line 94.

[769] _Master Adam_: Adam of Brescia, an accomplished worker in metals,
was induced by the Counts Guidi of Romena in the Casentino, the upland
district of the upper Arno, to counterfeit the gold coin of Florence.
This false coin is mentioned in a Chronicle as having been in
circulation in 1281. It must therefore have been somewhat later that
Master Adam was burned, as he was by sentence of the Republic, upon the
road which led from Romena to Florence. A cairn still existing near the
ruined castle bears the name of the 'dead man's cairn.'

[770] _The money coined, etc._: The gold florin, afterwards adopted in
so many countries, was first struck in 1252; 'which florins weighed
eight to the ounce, and bore the lily on the one side, and on the other
Saint John.'--(Villani, vi. 54.) The piece was thus of about the weight
of our half-sovereign. The gold was of twenty-four carats; that is, it
had no alloy. The coin soon passed into wide circulation, and to
maintain its purity became for the Florentines a matter of the first
importance. Villani, in the chapter above cited, tells how the King of
Tunis finding the florin to be of pure gold sent for some of the Pisans,
then the chief traders in his ports, and asked who were the Florentines
that they coined such money. 'Only our Arabs,' was the answer; meaning
that they were rough country folk, dependent on Pisa. 'Then what is your
coin like?' he asked. A Florentine of Oltrarno named Pera Balducci, who
was present, took the opportunity of informing him how great Florence
was compared with Pisa, as was shown by that city having no gold coinage
of its own; whereupon the King made the Florentines free of Tunis, and
allowed them to have a factory there. 'And this,' adds Villani, who had
himself been agent abroad for a great Florentine house of business, 'we
had at first hand from the aforesaid Pera, a man worthy of credit, and
with whom we were associated in the Priorate.'

[771] _Guido, etc._: The Guidi of Romena were a branch of the great
family of the Counts Guidi. The father of the three brothers in the text
was grandson of the old Guido that married the Good Gualdrada, and
cousin of the Guidoguerra met by Dante in the Seventh Circle (_Inf._
xvi. 38). How the third brother was called is not settled, nor which of
the three was already dead in the beginning of 1300. The Alexander of
Romena, who for some time was captain of the banished Florentine Whites,
was, most probably, he of the text. A letter is extant professing to be
written by Dante to two of Alexander's nephews on the occasion of his
death, in which the poet excuses himself for absence from the funeral on
the plea of poverty. By the time he wrote the _Inferno_ he may, owing to
their shifty politics, have lost all liking for the family, yet it seems
harsh measure that is here dealt to former friends and patrons.

[772] _Fonte Branda_: A celebrated fountain in the city of Siena. Near
Romena is a spring which is also named Fonte Branda; and this, according
to the view now most in favour, was meant by Master Adam. But was it so
named in Dante's time? Or was it not so called only when the _Comedy_
had begun to awaken a natural interest in the old coiner, which local
ingenuity did its best to meet? The early commentators know nothing of
the Casentino Fonte Branda, and, though it is found mentioned under the
date of 1539, that does not take us far enough back. In favour of the
Sienese fountain is the consideration that it was the richest of any in
the Tuscan cities; that it was a great architectural as well as
engineering work; and that, although now more than half a century old,
it was still the subject of curiosity with people far and near. Besides,
Adam has already recalled the brooks of Casentino, and so the mention of
the paltry spring at Romena would introduce no fresh idea like that of
the abundant waters of the great fountain which daily quenched the
thirst of thousands.

[773] _Eleven miles_: It will be remembered that the previous Bolgia was
twenty-two miles in circumference.

[774] _Three carats_: Three carats in twenty-four being of some foreign
substance.

[775] _Who smoke, etc._: This description of sufferers from high fever,
like that of Master Adam with his tympanitis, has the merit, such as it
is, of being true to the life.

[776] _One, etc._: Potiphar's wife.

[777] _Sinon_: Called of Troy, as being known through his conduct at the
siege. He pretended to have deserted from the Greeks, and by a false
story persuaded the Trojans to admit the fatal wooden horse.

[778] _When Trojans, etc._: When King Priam sought to know for what
purpose the wooden horse was really constructed.

[779] _Narcissus' mirror_: The pool in which Narcissus saw his form
reflected.

[780] _'Tis shame_: Dante knows that Virgil would have scorned to
portray such a scene of low life as this, but he must allow himself a
wider licence and here as elsewhere refuses nothing, even in the way of
mean detail, calculated to convey to his readers 'a full experience of
the Inferno' as he conceived of it--the place 'where all the vileness of
the world is cast.'
